---
title: Conclusions
numbering:
  enumerator: 6.%s
---

The ability to precisely navigate nanoscopic volumes will become
increasingly important to the field of materials science and electron
microscopy. While there have been a number of researchers who have
developed methodologies to predict both the stage motion of a double
tilt stage and crystallographic motion and diffraction analysis, these
have all typically been approached from an a priori stance where the
crystallographic information is known. The research herein focuses on
the approach of stage motion and crystal analysis initially where the
crystal and sample are treated as physical objects with no regard for
the physics of diffraction. Consideration of the vector motion,
regardless of crystal type, and the structure factor as a filter to
determine allowable planes/poles provides a more logical approach to
mapping for both known crystalline solids as well as unknown phases.
Additionally, it provides a direct relation of the crystal motion to
physical constructs (such as grain boundaries) in the microscope.

With the rising cost of high-end microscopes and a push for nanoscale
research, the cost-sharing model of financing purchases amongst a wide
user base has put a premium on microscope time similar to that of a
beamline user facility. Currently, crowd sourcing of instrumentation has
become the norm due to a variety of reasons ranging from peripheral
detectors approaching the price of base microscopes to ever-expanding
service contracts. The more sources that pool financial resources, the
higher the demand for instrumentation time. To overcome this,
microscopists will be required to not only become faster and more
accurate, but as well optimize every protocol available. Coupled with
the increased ease of site-specific sample preparation of FIB and plasma
FIB technology where a large number of samples can be prepared from all
sample types, there has is a need to perform better and more efficient
microscopy in order to take full advantage of collaborations between
institutions. Nanocartography, mapping of TEM samples from the global
scale down to the atomic column level, is a path forward to provide all
researchers a manner to achieve optimal results and rapidly share
information.

The necessity of nanocartography will be imperative toward the
development of automated TEM. Regardless of how well automated image
analysis may become, the projection aspect of TEM analysis will still
require human directed analysis to a point. On the road to more
automated data, collection, and analysis there must be a transition by
which microscopists are provided full control to map samples. More
importantly, the cost of instrumentation is an issue that will only
become more complicated with automated microscopy.

Mapping of samples and optimization of data collection for each sample
will be necessary for overcoming these challenges. Nanocartography is a
means by which to achieve this. Data from a preliminary session be
transferred to additional sessions, and samples can be shared between
instruments without each microscopist having to re-map the sample.
Preplanning of data analysis in between sessions could also assist in
targeting desired information.
